Go ahead, I'm sorry.
By structure, I mean even a classical idea.
Aristotle says that every drama moves from a condition with which it begins to its reversal by the end.
And when I saw that this story would begin with my first mass and end with my father's funeral mass,
and so much would have been reversed by the end.
My father in his prime, a man of power, having been declined almost biblically into a shell of himself and finally dead.
My being at the center of the ritual as the newly ordained priest to being kind of marginal to the ritual as a man on the margin of the church.
My being a son
to my being a father.
I mean, all these reversals, the way in which so many things were reversed from that first scene to the last scene, when I began to get a feel for that, then I saw the arc of the story and it enabled me to go through it.
And then the chapters fell open before me.
The FBI is one chapter, my religious education,
Well, my experience of the popes is another chapter.
My religious education is another chapter.
Civil rights is another chapter.
Vietnam is another chapter.
And then my priesthood itself is another chapter.
Well, you know, when you think of priests, typically, you think, oh, poor priests, they haven't really experienced anything.
They just live this sheltered life.
But you talk about living through these mental times and having experience.
Right, that's true.
You're talking about dating Linda Bird Johnson.
Right.
That's just got a couple of throwaway lines.
How did that come about?
Well, she was friends with a guy who was the son.
General Parikh Cabell was the deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency under Alan Dulles.
And he lived two or three doors down from us on General's Row.
And his son, Ben Cabell, whom I knew at Georgetown,
and who I knew from the base, was a sophisticated, urbane, well-connected, young prince of Washington.
That was the feeling he gave me.
He was a very elegant guy.
And he knew Lindeberg.
He was part of that circle, and he brought me into it.
That's how it happened.
On the S.S.
Sequoia.
Right.
Great little story.
You talk about the times
They really were.
Incredible times.
Let's say that the book hadn't sold it.
What were some of the options?
Well, I was free as a bird.
By the time I left the priesthood, I was cut loose on the world.
I had optimism, I was freedom.
I had no money, and I had no need for it.
I was absolutely a free man.
It was a wonderful period of my life.
If I hadn't been able to find a way to live as a writer, I think I probably, I don't know, maybe I would have gone back to school and gotten a degree in history.
I don't know.
become a teacher.
I love teaching.
Yeah, I mean, I don't know.
As it happened, writing was... I fell into writing.
Apollos encouraged me to do it.
I loved writing sermons.
I loved telling the stories of the Gospel.
When I was a preacher, all I ever wanted to do as a preacher was make people understand how great these stories are.
The story of Jesus, the story of Moses,
This week, the story of Passover.
I mean, these great stories, you know.
Have you saved the family?
No.
I never wrote them.
Oh, really?
I always just told them.
And, I mean, it appalls me now to think of how cavalier I was about it, you know.
So let's talk about this gift of stuff.
I think it's really kind of like two hours.
Yeah.
Yeah, sure.
Do you think this gift of storytelling has anything to do with your Irish story?
Well, I think I refer somewhere in this book to the powerful impression my mother made on me as a storyteller.
Taking us around in Washington and telling the stories of Washington.
And I... Right.
At which point she became different.
But, you know, when I think of what I did...
For example, pulling together the stories of Boston when I was really getting my head into the novel of Mortal Friends.
It was a version of what she had done for me, with me, when I was a very young boy.
There's the Carol Arms Hotel.
I remember vividly her telling me a story about my father doing a surveillance on a German spy in the Carol Arms Hotel, where he was in one room and the spy was in another room.
Whether it was really a spy, who knows, but somebody the FBI was tracking anyway.
And my father, she told me my father, you know, in this room, listening to what the man was doing in the next room.
And I still remember that.
And I don't go to Washington to this day without my imagination going to the Carol Arms Hotel, even though the building was demolished years ago.
It was on Capitol Hill near the Capitol.
And it made an impression on me, of course, because it was my name also, the Carol Arms.
Mark Russell, the humorist.
began his career in the bar at the Carol Arms Hotel, where I used to go.
Yeah, then he moved to the Shoreham, but before he was at the Shoreham, he was at the Carol Arms.
And I used to go there when I was a college kid, to the Carol Arms, to listen to Mark Russell.
So, you know, the stories my mother told, I think, was a powerful impact, made a powerful impression on me.
I don't think Pat Conway was the first storyteller, the first novelist he ever knew, that I would never learn a novel, but he was a storyteller.
Yeah.
They were all pictures.
They were so beautiful, you know.
Okay, and then I guess, what's the works in progress, thoughts?
I'm in the middle of a novel I've been working on for a long time, which is, I don't know how to describe it, so I better not.
But it's a novel, yeah.
You described sending your brother's copies of the manuscript and saying also, if you read all it, it doesn't go.
So I would conclude from that that the book was not under contract at that point.
Did you write this kind of as an exercise?
The book was under contract.
I don't know how I would have dealt with that.
So you did write it?
I did.
I did, yeah.
Was it a proposal?
Yes.
Well, it wasn't a proposal.
It was a sort of... I'd given a talk about my father and myself, and it was maybe 30 pages long, and I'd written it up.
I used that, and I gave that talk.
We're meeting today on Wednesday, which happens to be the Wednesday that falls between Palm Sunday and Easter.
It's Passover, but in the old Catholic tradition, it's called Spy Wednesday, because this is the day, Wednesday of Holy Week, when Judas betrayed Jesus.
Dropped the dime.
Literally dropped the dime.
But boy, isn't that interesting when we're talking about family traits?
It's true.
Let me also add one thing.
I wanted to emphasize, and to the extent that it's relevant when you're talking about the editorial process, that my editor, Wendy Strothman, really played a key role in my doing this.
She heard that talk I gave.
And you gave the talk where, once again?
I gave the talk at the Examiner's Club in Boston, which is a small... And she happened to be there?
And she's a member, and she's... She's based in Boston?
Yes, she is.
So that's part two of us.
So many of the writers are in New York.
Right.
And she really affirmed the idea of the story as a book, and she really gave me some important support, personal support in the writing of it.
I mean, she's a fine entertainer.
Was she there just mainly to hear the talk or to consider it as a possibility?
No, no, no, she was just there to hear the talk, yeah.
And did she propose the idea?
No, but she, you know, I knew that I would be at some point writing a book.
full version of this story, and she just made it very clear that she thought it would be a valuable story, and she wanted to publish it, and so I'm grateful to her.
I'm holding a volume titled Poems by Alan Tate, and it's inscribed in the first front case down here, inscribed to James Carroll with all good wishes for his two vocations, Alan Tate, April 12th, 1966, and this is
You see the puppy.
It's 1960, Charles Spirits.
You should put a little... I know, I should.
Would you?
We should really protect that.
It sure is, yeah.
That's quite a wonderful... I noticed you're reading the old dial here.
To occasion, I'd like to shoot a couple of pictures.